---
title: OEV
pageHeader: OEV Searchers â†’ Overview
outline: deep
---

<PageHeader/>

# What is OEV?

Oracle Extractable Value (OEV) is a subset of Maximal Extractable Value (MEV)
that occurs as a result of an oracle update. Traditional oracle solutions update
data feeds blindly, which is wasteful and provides poor granularity.

OEV is an addition to these push oracle updates to improve efficiency and
granularity of the price feeds. The idea is that not all oracle updates are the
same. Some oracle updates expose opportunities on the market which can be
captured by "searchers". Searchers monitor the market for profitable
opportunities and compete with each other to realize them first - paying the
majority of the exposed value to block validators in the process. This dynamic
is unhealthy, because the majority of the value should be split between the dApp
and the searcher that realized the opportunity.

OEV solves this problem by auctioning off the exclusive rights to execute the
oracle update(s), allowing the searcher to atomically update the price feed(s)
used by the dApps and capture the opportunity on the market. The exclusive
update rights guarantee no competition and searcher avoids paying premium on the
gas fees. On the other hand, the auction proceeds are distributed back to the
dApp which created this opportunity, generating a completely new revenue stream.

With OEV, searchers announce the desire to do the oracle updates themselves
along with the amount they are willing to pay for it. The process is facilitated
by open auctions, bound by rules that enforced on-chain. The winner of an
auction must pay for winning the auction, which allows them to use the oracle
update and capture profitable opportunities.

## Example

Imagine an overcollateralized lending platform, which uses API3 price feeds.
Borrowers of the protocol can be liquidated with some incentive whenever their
position becomes unhealthy to ensure the protocol remains solvent. Say
liquidations can occur if the loan-to-value ratio is over 90%. Let's look at
what happens with the protocol's health over time.

Assume, that initially there are no unhealthy positions. Many of the price feed
updates that happen are "unnecessary", because they don't expose any unhealthy
positions and the protocol remains healthy. However, say in time there is a
price drop that causes many of the positions which used that asset as collateral
to get close to the 90% liquidation threshold.

In this scenario, the next price update that causes a position to become
unhealthy has some intrinsic value. From the protocol's perspective, this
affects its solvency and presents a threat. On the other hand, for a searcher
this poses a profitable opportunity. The intrinsic value of the price update is
equal to the profit the searcher can make. The profit is simply the liquidation
incentive minus the operational gas costs.

A searcher monitors the dApp and sees that this opportunity is soon to become
unhealthy. They announce that they want to purchase exclusive priority for
updating the price feeds and pay X in return. They win the auction, pay X to the
dApp and make the price feed updates and liquidation atomically.

The concept of OEV is not tailored only to liquidations, but can occur anywhere
where price feed updates potentially expose profitable opportunities, such as
arbitrage and many more.

## OEV Proceeds Distribution

To be able to update the data feed, the auction winner must pay the bid amount
of the winning bid, which they've announced during the auction. In return, they
get exclusive rights to capture the OEV. Searchers are compensated for this
activity by the liquidation incentive. Thus the majority of the OEV is
distributed to the dApp and the searchers. These are the parties who made the
opportunity possible.

## How do Auctions Work?

API3 has delivered a specialized on-chain Order Flow Auction (OFA) similar to
the one you might be familiar with from Flashbots and MEV-Boost.

We use a combination of the [OEV Network](#oev-network) and the
[OEV Auctioneer](#oev-auctioneer) to power the OEV auctions in a secure and
transparent way.

At a high level, auctions repeat continuously and indefinitely. There is a
separate auction for each dApp. Each auction takes a fixed amount of time.
Searchers place bids during the auction and announce a bid amount they're
willing to pay. When the auction ends, the highest eligible bidder is proclaimed
as the winner and provided a cryptographic signature. The signature gives them
exclusive rights to update any price feed(s) for the dApp for a limited period
of time. Each time an auction ends, a new one is started and the same process
repeats.

After an auction winner fulfills their duties by paying for the winning bid,
they need to report this back to OEV network. If they fail to do so, part of
their collateral gets slashed. This is an important security aspect to prevent
denying OEV recapture by withholding auction payments.

### OEV Network

The OEV Network hosts auctions in a transparent way, ensuring that any disputes
can be resolved by analyzing the on-chain data. Searchers submit their bids
on-chain, where the winner is announced and given the exclusive rights to
execute the oracle update.

### OEV Auctioneer

A key component of OEV is an off-chain auction system that processes the
auctions taking place on the OEV network. We call this system OEV Auctioneer,
and it is managed by the API3 DAO. The honesty of OEV Auctioneer is ensured by
using the OEV Network for all important actions, such as announcing the auction
winner.

## Get Involved with OEV

Here are more resources how you to get started with OEV:

1. Dive deeper into OEV by reading the
   [OEV Litepaper](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/api3dao/oev-litepaper/main/oev-litepaper.pdf).
2. Check out our detailed [Searchers guide](/oev-searchers/in-depth/) to see how
   to start searching.
3. Connect with other developers and OEV enthusiasts in our
   [OEV Discord channel](https://discord.com/channels/758003776174030948/1062909222347603989).
4. Follow API3 on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/API3DAO) for the latest news and
   updates on OEV.
